Project Gutenberg's The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, by William Blake

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Marriage of Heaven and Hell

Author: William Blake

Release Date: April 4, 2014 [EBook #45315]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARRIAGE OF HEAVEN AND HELL ***




Produced by eagkw, Dianna Adair and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







  THE MARRIAGE OF HEAVEN
  AND HELL




  THE MARRIAGE OF
  HEAVEN AND HELL

  BY
  WILLIAM BLAKE


  [Illustration]


  BOSTON
  JOHN W. LUCE AND COMPANY
  1906




THE MARRIAGE OF HEAVEN AND HELL




THE ARGUMENT


    Rintrah roars and shakes his fires in the burden'd air,
    Hungry clouds swag on the deep.

    Once meek, and in a perilous path
    The just man kept his course along
    The Vale of Death.
    Roses are planted where thorns grow,
    And on the barren heath
    Sing the honey bees.

    Then the perilous path was planted,
    And a river and a spring
    On every cliff and tomb;
    And on the bleached bones
    Red clay brought forth:
    Till the villain left the paths of ease
    To walk in perilous paths, and drive
    The just man into barren climes.

    Now the sneaking serpent walks
    In mild humility;
    And the just man rages in the wilds
    Where lions roam.

    Rintrah roars and shakes his fires in the burden'd air,
    Hungry clouds swag on the deep.


As a new heaven is begun, and it is now thirty-three years since its
advent, the Eternal Hell revives. And lo! Swedenborg is the angel
sitting at the tomb: his writings are the linen clothes folded up. Now
is the dominion of Edom, and the return of Adam into Paradise.--See
Isaiah xxxiv. and xxxv. chap.

Without contraries is no progression. Attraction and repulsion, reason
and energy, love and hate, are necessary to human existence.

From these contraries spring what the religious call Good and Evil.
Good is the passive that obeys reason; Evil is the active springing
from Energy.

Good is heaven. Evil is hell.




THE VOICE OF THE DEVIL


All Bibles or sacred codes have been the cause of the following
errors:--

1. That man has two real existing principles, viz., a Body and a Soul.

2. That Energy, called Evil, is alone from the Body; and that Reason,
called Good, is alone from the Soul.

3. That God will torment man in Eternity for following his Energies.

But the following contraries to these are true:--

1. Man has no Body distinct from his Soul. For that called Body is a
portion of Soul discerned by the five senses, the chief inlets of Soul
in this age.

2. Energy is the only life, and is from the Body; and Reason is the
bound or outward circumference of Energy.

3. Energy is Eternal Delight.

Those who restrain desire, do so because theirs is weak enough to be
restrained; and the restrainer or reason usurps its place and governs
the unwilling.

And being restrained, it by degrees becomes passive, till it is only
the shadow of desire.

The history of this is written in Paradise Lost, and the Governor or
Reason is called Messiah.

And the original Archangel or possessor of the command of the heavenly
host is called the Devil, or Satan, and his children are called Sin and
Death.

But in the book of Job, Milton's Messiah is called Satan.

For this history has been adopted by both parties.

It indeed appeared to Reason as if desire was cast out, but the
Devil's account is, that the Messiah fell, and formed a heaven of what
he stole from the abyss.

This is shown in the Gospel, where he prays to the Father to send the
Comforter or desire that Reason may have ideas to build on, the Jehovah
of the Bible being no other than he who dwells in flaming fire. Know
that after Christ's death he became Jehovah.

But in Milton, the Father is Destiny, the Son a ratio of the five
senses, and the Holy Ghost vacuum!


_Note._--The reason Milton wrote in fetters when he wrote of Angels and
God, and at liberty when of Devils and Hell, is because he was a true
poet, and of the Devil's party without knowing it.




A MEMORABLE FANCY


As I was walking among the fires of Hell, delighted with the enjoyments
of Genius, which to Angels look like torment and insanity, I collected
some of their proverbs, thinking that as the sayings used in a nation
mark its character, so the proverbs of Hell show the nature of infernal
wisdom better than any description of buildings or garments.

When I came home, on the abyss of the five senses, where a flat-sided
steep frowns over the present world, I saw a mighty Devil folded in
black clouds hovering on the sides of the rock; with corroding fires
he wrote the following sentence now perceived by the minds of men, and
read by them on earth:--

    "How do you know but every bird
        that cuts the airy way
    Is an immense world of delight,
        closed by your senses five?"




PROVERBS OF HELL


In seed-time learn, in harvest teach, in winter enjoy.

Drive your cart and your plough over the bones of the dead.

The road of excess leads to the palace of wisdom.

Prudence is a rich ugly old maid courted by Incapacity.

He who desires, but acts not, breeds pestilence.

The cut worm forgives the plough.

Dip him in the river who loves water.

A fool sees not the same tree that a wise man sees.

He whose face gives no light shall never become a star.

Eternity is in love with the productions of time.

The busy bee has no time for sorrow.

The hours of folly are measured by the clock, but of wisdom no clock
can measure.

All wholesome food is caught without a net or a trap.

Bring out number, weight, and measure in a year of dearth.

No bird soars too high if he soars with his own wings.

A dead body revenges not injuries.

The most sublime act is to set another before you.

If the fool would persist in his folly he would become wise.

Folly is the cloak of knavery.

Shame is Pride's cloak.

Prisons are built with stones of law, brothels with bricks of religion.

The pride of the peacock is the glory of God.

The lust of the goat is the bounty of God.

The wrath of the lion is the wisdom of God.

The nakedness of woman is the work of God.

Excess of sorrow laughs, excess of joy weeps.

The roaring of lions, the howling of wolves, the raging of the stormy
sea, and the destructive sword, are portions of Eternity too great for
the eye of man.

The fox condemns the trap, not himself.

Joys impregnate, sorrows bring forth.

Let man wear the fell of the lion, woman the fleece of the sheep.

The bird a nest, the spider a web, man friendship.

The selfish smiling fool and the sullen frowning fool shall be both
thought wise that they may be a rod.

What is now proved was once only imagined.

The rat, the mouse, the fox, the rabbit watch the roots; the lion, the
tiger, the horse, the elephant watch the fruits.

The cistern contains, the fountain overflows.

One thought fills immensity.

Always be ready to speak your mind, and a base man will avoid you.

Everything possible to be believed is an image of truth.

The eagle never lost so much time as when he submitted to learn of the
crow.

The fox provides for himself, but God provides for the lion.

Think in the morning, act in the noon, eat in the evening, sleep in the
night.

He who has suffered you to impose on him knows you.

As the plough follows words, so God rewards prayers.

The tigers of wrath are wiser than the horses of instruction.

Expect poison from the standing water.

You never know what is enough unless you know what is more than enough.

Listen to the fool's reproach; it is a kingly title.

The eyes of fire, the nostrils of air, the mouth of water, the beard
of earth.

The weak in courage is strong in cunning.

The apple tree never asks the beech how he shall grow, nor the lion the
horse how he shall take his prey.

The thankful receiver bears a plentiful harvest.

If others had not been foolish we should have been so.

The soul of sweet delight can never be defiled.

When thou seest an eagle, thou seest a portion of Genius. Lift up thy
head!

As the caterpillar chooses the fairest leaves to lay her eggs on, so
the priest lays his curse on the fairest joys.

To create a little flower is the labour of ages.

Damn braces; bless relaxes.

The best wine is the oldest, the best water the newest.

Prayers plough not; praises reap not; joys laugh not; sorrows weep not.

The head Sublime, the heart Pathos, the genitals Beauty, the hands and
feet Proportion.

As the air to a bird, or the sea to a fish, so is contempt to the
contemptible.

The crow wished everything was black; the owl that everything was white.

Exuberance is Beauty.

If the lion was advised by the fox, he would be cunning.

Improvement makes straight roads, but the crooked roads without
Improvement are roads of Genius.

Sooner murder an infant in its cradle than nurse unacted desires.

Where man is not, nature is barren.

Truth can never be told so as to be understood and not to be believed.

Enough! or Too much.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ancient poets animated all sensible objects with Gods or Geniuses,
calling them by the names and adorning them with properties of woods,
rivers, mountains, lakes, cities, nations, and whatever their enlarged
and numerous senses could perceive. And particularly they studied the
Genius of each city and country, placing it under its mental deity.
Till a system was formed, which some took advantage of and enslaved the
vulgar by attempting to realize or abstract the mental deities from
their objects. Thus began Priesthood. Choosing forms of worship from
poetic tales. And at length they pronounced that the Gods had ordered
such things. Thus men forgot that all deities reside in the human
breast.




A MEMORABLE FANCY


The Prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel dined with me, and I asked them how
they dared so roundly to assert that God spoke to them, and whether
they did not think at the time that they would be misunderstood, and so
be the cause of imposition.

Isaiah answered: "I saw no God, nor heard any, in a finite organical
perception: but my senses discovered the infinite in everything; and as
I was then persuaded, and remained confirmed, that the voice of honest
indignation is the voice of God, I cared not for consequences, but
wrote."

Then I asked: "Does a firm persuasion that a thing is so, make it so?"

He replied: "All poets believe that it does, and in ages of imagination
this firm persuasion removed mountains; but many are not capable of a
firm persuasion of anything."

Then Ezekiel said: "The philosophy of the East taught the first
principles of human perception; some nations held one principle for
the origin, and some another. We of Israel taught that the Poetic
Genius (as you now call it) was the first principle, and all the others
merely derivative, which was the cause of our despising the Priests and
Philosophers of other countries, and prophesying that all Gods would
at last be proved to originate in ours, and to be the tributaries of
the Poetic Genius. It was this that our great poet King David desired
so fervently, and invokes so pathetically, saying by this he conquers
enemies and governs kingdoms; and we so loved our God that we cursed
in His name all the deities of surrounding nations, and asserted that
they had rebelled. From these opinions the vulgar came to think that
all nations would at last be subject to the Jews.

"This," said he, "like all firm persuasions, is come to pass, for all
nations believe the Jews' code, and worship the Jews' God; and what
greater subjection can be?"

I heard this with some wonder, and must confess my own conviction.
After dinner I asked Isaiah to favour the world with his lost works; he
said none of equal value was lost. Ezekiel said the same of his.

I also asked Isaiah what made him go naked and barefoot three years. He
answered: "The same that made our friend Diogenes the Grecian."

I then asked Ezekiel why he ate dung, and lay so long on his right
and left side. He answered: "The desire of raising other men into a
perception of the infinite. This the North American tribes practise.
And is he honest who resists his genius or conscience, only for the
sake of present ease or gratification?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The ancient tradition that the world will be consumed in fire at the
end of six thousand years is true, as I have heard from Hell.

For the cherub with his flaming sword is hereby commanded to leave his
guard at [the] tree of life, and when he does, the whole creation will
be consumed and appear infinite and holy, whereas it now appears finite
and corrupt.

This will come to pass by an improvement of sensual enjoyment.

But first the notion that man has a body distinct from his soul is
to be expunged; this I shall do by printing in the infernal method by
corrosives, which in Hell are salutary and medicinal, melting apparent
surfaces away, and displaying the infinite which was hid.

If the doors of perception were cleansed everything would appear to man
as it is, infinite.

For man has closed himself up, till he sees all things through narrow
chinks of his cavern.




A MEMORABLE FANCY


I was in a printing-house in Hell, and saw the method in which
knowledge is transmitted from generation to generation.

In the first chamber was a dragon-man, clearing away the rubbish from a
cave's mouth; within, a number of dragons were hollowing the cave.

In the second chamber was a viper folding round the rock and the cave,
and others adorning it with gold, silver, and precious stones.

In the third chamber was an eagle with wings and feathers of air; he
caused the inside of the cave to be infinite; around were numbers of
eagle-like men, who built palaces in the immense cliffs.

In the fourth chamber were lions of flaming fire raging around and
melting the metals into living fluids.

In the fifth chamber were unnamed forms, which cast the metals into the
expanse.

There they were received by men who occupied the sixth chamber, and
took the forms of books, and were arranged in libraries.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Giants who formed this world into its sensual existence and now
seem to live in it in chains are in truth the causes of its life and
the sources of all activity, but the chains are the cunning of weak
and tame minds, which have power to resist energy, according to the
proverb, "The weak in courage is strong in cunning."

Thus one portion of being is the Prolific, the other the Devouring. To
the devourer it seems as if the producer was in his chains; but it is
not so, he only takes portions of existence, and fancies that the whole.

But the Prolific would cease to be prolific unless the Devourer as a
sea received the excess of his delights.

Some will say, "Is not God alone the Prolific?" I answer: "God only
acts and is in existing beings or men."

These two classes of men are always upon earth, and they should be
enemies: whoever tries to reconcile them seeks to destroy existence.

Religion is an endeavour to reconcile the two.


_Note._--Jesus Christ did not wish to unite but to separate them, as
in the parable of sheep and goats; and He says: "I came not to send
peace, but a sword."

Messiah, or Satan, or Tempter, was formerly thought to be one of the
antediluvians who are our Energies.




A MEMORABLE FANCY


An Angel came to me and said: "O pitiable foolish young man! O
horrible, O dreadful state! Consider the hot burning dungeon thou art
preparing for thyself to all Eternity, to which thou art going in such
career."

I said: "Perhaps you will be willing to show me my eternal lot, and we
will contemplate together upon it, and see whether your lot or mine is
most desirable."

So he took me through a stable, and through a church, and down into
the church vault, at the end of which was a mill; through the mill we
went, and came to a cave; down the winding cavern we groped our tedious
way, till a void boundless as a nether sky appeared beneath us, and we
held by the roots of trees, and hung over this immensity; but I said:
"If you please, we will commit ourselves to this void, and see whether
Providence is here also; if you will not, I will." But he answered: "Do
not presume, O young man; but as we here remain, behold thy lot, which
will soon appear when the darkness passes away."

So I remained with him sitting in the twisted root of an oak; he was
suspended in a fungus, which hung with the head downward into the deep.

By degrees we beheld the infinite abyss, fiery as the smoke of a
burning city; beneath us at an immense distance was the sun, black but
shining; round it were fiery tracks on which revolved vast spiders,
crawling after their prey, which flew, or rather swum, in the infinite
deep, in the most terrific shapes of animals sprung from corruption;
and the air was full of them, and seemed composed of them. These are
Devils, and are called powers of the air. I now asked my companion
which was my eternal lot. He said: "Between the black and white
spiders."

But now, from between the black and white spiders, a cloud and fire
burst and rolled through the deep, blackening all beneath so that the
nether deep grew black as a sea, and rolled with a terrible noise.
Beneath us was nothing now to be seen but a black tempest, till looking
East between the clouds and the waves, we saw a cataract of blood mixed
with fire, and not many stones' throw from us appeared and sunk again
the scaly fold of a monstrous serpent. At last to the East, distant
about three degrees, appeared a fiery crest above the waves; slowly
it reared like a ridge of golden rocks, till we discovered two globes
of crimson fire, from which the sea fled away in clouds of smoke; and
now we saw it was the head of Leviathan. His forehead was divided into
streaks of green and purple, like those on a tiger's forehead; soon we
saw his mouth and red gills hang just above the raging foam, tinging
the black deeps with beams of blood, advancing toward us with all the
fury of a spiritual existence.

My friend the Angel climbed up from his station into the mill. I
remained alone, and then this appearance was no more; but I found
myself sitting on a pleasant bank beside a river by moonlight, hearing
a harper who sung to the harp; and his theme was: "The man who never
alters his opinion is like standing water, and breeds reptiles of the
mind."

But I arose, and sought for the mill, and there I found my Angel, who,
surprised, asked me how I escaped.

I answered: "All that we saw was owing to your metaphysics; for when
you ran away, I found myself on a bank by moonlight, hearing a harper.
But now we have seen my eternal lot, shall I show you yours?" He
laughed at my proposal; but I by force suddenly caught him in my arms,
and flew Westerly through the night, till we were elevated above the
earth's shadow; then I flung myself with him directly into the body
of the sun; here I clothed myself in white, and taking in my hand
Swedenborg's volumes, sunk from the glorious clime, and passed all the
planets till we came to Saturn. Here I stayed to rest, and then leaped
into the void between Saturn and the fixed stars.

"Here," said I, "is your lot; in this space, if space it may be
called." Soon we saw the stable and the church, and I took him to the
altar and opened the Bible, and lo! it was a deep pit, into which I
descended, driving the Angel before me. Soon we saw seven houses of
brick. One we entered. In it were a number of monkeys, baboons, and
all of that species, chained by the middle, grinning and snatching at
one another, but withheld by the shortness of their chains. However, I
saw that they sometimes grew numerous, and then the weak were caught
by the strong, and with a grinning aspect, first coupled with and then
devoured by plucking off first one limb and then another till the body
was left a helpless trunk; this, after grinning and kissing it with
seeming fondness, they devoured too. And here and there I saw one
savourily picking the flesh off his own tail. As the stench terribly
annoyed us both, we went into the mill; and I in my hand brought the
skeleton of a body, which in the mill was Aristotle's Analytics.

So the Angel said: "Thy phantasy has imposed upon me, and thou oughtest
to be ashamed."

I answered: "We impose on one another, and it is but lost time to
converse with you whose works are only Analytics."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have always found that Angels have the vanity to speak of themselves
as the only wise; this they do with a confident insolence sprouting
from systematic reasoning.

"Thus Swedenborg boasts that what he writes is new; though it is only
the contents or index of already published books.

"A man carried a monkey about for a show, and because he was a little
wiser than the monkey, grew vain, and conceived himself as much
wiser than seven men. It is so with Swedenborg; he shows the folly
of churches, and exposes hypocrites, till he imagines that all are
religious, and himself the single one on earth that ever broke a net.

"Now hear a plain fact: Swedenborg has not written one new truth. Now
hear another: he has written all the old falsehoods.

"And now hear the reason: he conversed with Angels who are all
religious, and conversed not with Devils who all hate religion, for he
was incapable through his conceited notions.

"Thus Swedenborg's writings are a recapitulation of all superficial
opinions, and an analysis of the more sublime, but no further.

"Have now another plain fact: any man of mechanical talents may from
the writings of Paracelsus or Jacob Behmen produce ten thousand
volumes of equal value with Swedenborg's, and from those of Dante or
Shakespeare an infinite number.

"But when he has done this, let him not say that he knows better than
his master, for he only holds a candle in sunshine."




A MEMORABLE FANCY


Once I saw a Devil in a flame of fire, who arose before an Angel that
sat on a cloud, and the Devil uttered these words: "The worship of God
is, honouring His gifts in other men each according to his genius, and
loving the greatest men best. Those who envy or calumniate great men
hate God, for there is no other God."

The Angel hearing this became almost blue, but mastering himself he
grew yellow, and at last white-pink and smiling, and then replied:
"Thou idolater, is not God One? and is not He visible in Jesus
Christ? and has not Jesus Christ given His sanction to the law of ten
commandments? and are not all other men fools, sinners, and nothings?"

The Devil answered: "Bray a fool in a mortar with wheat, yet shall not
his folly be beaten out of him. If Jesus Christ is the greatest man,
you ought to love Him in the greatest degree. Now hear how He has given
His sanction to the law of ten commandments. Did He not mock at the
Sabbath, and so mock the Sabbath's God? murder those who were murdered
because of Him? turn away the law from the woman taken in adultery,
steal the labour of others to support Him? bear false witness when
He omitted making a defence before Pilate? covet when He prayed for
His disciples, and when He bid them shake off the dust of their feet
against such as refused to lodge them? I tell you, no virtue can exist
without breaking these ten commandments. Jesus was all virtue, and
acted from impulse, not from rules."

When he had so spoken, I beheld the Angel, who stretched out his arms
embracing the flame of fire, and he was consumed, and arose as Elijah.


_Note._--This Angel, who is now become a Devil, is my particular
friend; we often read the Bible together in its infernal or diabolical
sense, which the world shall have if they behave well.

I have also the Bible of Hell, which the world shall have whether they
will or no.

One law for the lion and ox is Oppression.




A SONG OF LIBERTY


1. The Eternal Female groan'd; it was heard over all the earth:

2. Albion's coast is sick silent; the American meadows faint.

3. Shadows of prophecy shiver along by the lakes and the rivers, and
mutter across the ocean. France, rend down thy dungeon!

4. Golden Spain, burst the barriers of old Rome!

5. Cast thy keys, O Rome, into the deep--down falling, even to eternity
down falling;

6. And weep!

7. In her trembling hands she took the new-born terror, howling.

8. On those infinite mountains of light now barr'd out by the Atlantic
sea, the new-born fire stood before the starry king.

9. Flagg'd with grey-brow'd snows and thunderous visages, the jealous
wings wav'd over the deep.

10. The speary hand burn'd aloft; unbuckled was the shield; forth went
the hand of jealousy among the flaming hair, and hurl'd the new-born
wonder through the starry night.

11. The fire, the fire is falling!

12. Look up! look up! O citizen of London, enlarge thy countenance! O
Jew, leave counting gold; return to thy oil and wine! O African, black
African! (Go, winged thought, widen his forehead.)

13. The fiery limbs, the flaming hair shot like the sinking sun into
the Western sea.

14. Wak'd from his eternal sleep, the hoary element roaring fled away.

15. Down rush'd, beating his wings in vain, the jealous king, his
grey-brow'd councillors, thunderous warriors, curl'd veterans, among
helms and shields, and chariots, horses, elephants, banners, castles,
slings, and rocks.

16. Falling, rushing, ruining; buried in the ruins, on Urthona's dens.

17. All night beneath the ruins; then their sullen flames, faded,
emerge round the gloomy king.

18. With thunder and fire, leading his starry hosts through the waste
wilderness, he promulgates his ten commandments, glancing his beamy
eyelids over the deep in dark dismay.

19. Where the Son of Fire in his Eastern cloud, while the Morning
plumes her golden breast,

20. Spurning the clouds written with curses, stamps the stony law
to dust, loosing the eternal horses from the dens of night, crying:
"Empire is no more! and now the lion and wolf shall cease."




CHORUS


Let the Priests of the Raven of Dawn, no longer in deadly black, with
hoarse note curse the Sons of Joy. Nor his accepted brethren whom,
tyrant, he calls free, lay the bound or build the roof. Nor pale
religious lechery call that virginity that wishes, but acts not!

For everything that lives is holy.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, by William Blake

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARRIAGE OF HEAVEN AND HELL ***

***** This file should be named 45315.txt or 45315.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/3/1/45315/

Produced by eagkw, Dianna Adair and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
